# Foam Ball Shooter

This was the project I worked on during the summer of 2025. I wanted to design something with my 3D printer on my own. I decided to create something to shoot ping pong balls or similar, and I expanded this idea into an automatic foam ball launcher.


## Design Process
Before designing anything, I wanted to decide on two main parts of the mechanism: how the balls would be fed into the flywheels, and whether to use one or two motors for the flywheels. I decided to use flywheels (instead of something pneumatic) because it is much simpler, especially when making parts with a 3D printer. Ultimately, I decided to use one motor for both flywheels. This is because I already had one high-power motor, and even if using two identical motors, there would be a slight difference in speed, which is difficult to tune due to being much higher power than the ESP32. Having only one motor also makes the assembly much lighter. For the feeding mechanism, I decided to use a gravity-based system, do to its simplicity. The balls would be dropped into the flywheels in a controlled manner (using a servo), rather than a more complicated option like a solenoid or belt to move them into the flywheels.<br/><br/>

By choosing only to use one motor, I had to figure out how to move the rotation from the motor itself to the 2 driveshafts the flywheels would be attached to. I quickly decided to place the motor in the middle of the assembly, since it is the majority of the weight of the part, and I wanted to ensure it was well balanced, since I was planning to have the barrel tilt and rotate. I narrowed my options to a belt and a gear array. I decided on using belts, since I could buy 3D printer belts and belt gears and idlers. However, standardized gears would not work, and so I would have had to print gears myself. I decided against this because the plastic gears would likely have been much too weak or would have had to be very large to support the high forces of the motor. The one issue with a belt system was that by directly driving both driveshafts, one would spin the wrong way. I solved this by driving a shaft next to one of the driveshafts, and 2 gears to reverse the spinning direction.<br/><br/>

After deciding on how the core part of the shooter would work, I started designing the main feeder/barrel part of the launcher. I designed the parts to be light, strong and while trying to keep the required supports when printing to a minimum. In the end, I decided to make the shooter in one main part, with the motor and belts mounted to a separate, smaller part, as well as a separate magazine part to reduce the print size.
